High level feedback of log-levels.md (#34)
swift-server/guides: docs/log-levels.md

# Log Levels

> This guide serves as guidelines for library authors with regards to what [SwiftLog](https://github.com/apple/swift-log) log levels are appropriate for use in libraries, and in which situations to use which level.

Author: Good introduction but could use some fleshing out.  Define what a library is here, and why logging guidelines that are suitable for applications may not be suitable for libraries.  You address specific points in subsections but could use a thesis here.

Reviewer: thanks, I revamped it a bit:

```
# Libraries: Log Level guidelines for Library authors

This guide serves as guidelines for library authors with regard to what [SwiftLog](https://github.com/apple/swift-log) log levels are appropriate for use in libraries, and in what situations to use what level.

Libraries need to be well-behaved across various use cases, and cannot assume a specific style of logging backend will be used with them. It is up to developers implementing specific applications and systems to configure those specifics of their application, and some may choose to log to disk, some to memory, or some may employ sophisticated log aggregators. In all those cases a library should behave "well", meaning that it should not overwhelm typical ("stdout") log backends by logging too much, alerting too much by over-using `error` level log statements etc.

In this guide we'll explore the various aspects a library developer should be aware of when implementing logging in their library.

```

> Debug level logging should be not "too" noisy. Developers should assume some production deployments may need to (or want to) run with debug level logging enabled. 
>
> Debug level logging should not completely undermine the performance of a production system.

As such, `debug` logging should provide a high value understanding of what is going on in the library for end users, using domain relevant language.  Logging at `debug` level should not be overly noisy or dive deep into internals; this is what `trace` is intended for.

Use `warning` level sparingly. Whenever possible, try to rather return or throw `Error` to end users that are descriptive enough so they can inspect, log them and figure out the issue. Potentially, they may then enable debug logging to find out more about the issue.

It is okay to log a `warning` "once", for example on system startup. This may include some one off "more secure configuration is available, try upgrading to it!" log statement upon a server's startup. You may also log warnings from background processes, which otherwise have no other means of informing the end user about some issue.

> Logging on `error` level is similar to warnings: prefer to avoid doing so whenever possible. Instead, report errors via your library's API. For example, it is _not_ a good idea to log "connection failed" from an HTTP client. Perhaps the end-user intended to make this request to a known offline server to _confirm_ it is offline? From their perspective, this connection error is not a "real" error, it is just what they expected -- as such the HTTP client should return or throw such an error, but _not_ log it.

Author: True, and there's also another problem with errors in that they can require context that is lacking.  I'm not sure where to put this, so I'll just describe it and hope it's useful.  This isn't an argument against error log levels per ce but more about how to handle operations when work is offloaded "somewhere else".

Akka HTTP has a parser that runs asynchronously on HTTP POST input - the network deals with the chunks and the parser deals with the input.  However, there are situations where the incoming POST dies and terminates the connection.  This then kills the connection to the parser, but the parser doesn't know what connection and what POST request was responsible, or even what the input was at all.  As such, it logs an error because it has no feedback channel to know what happened and why.

So even though there's an error, it's not useful in itself -- there's no context, and no way for the network processor to signal to the parser than it should give up and die quietly.

Reviewer: Yeah, I'll see if any useful wording about it that i could add

* `error`
* `critical`

> Out of those, only levels _less severe than_ info (exclusively) are generally okay to be used by libraries.

Author: This is a good general overview, but does not define the alternative (returning error object, throwing exception) and does not refer to error handling document.

Also, in situations where there's a complex result i.e. applying an invalid configuration to an engine, this doesn't talk about [accumulation](https://www.scalactic.org/user_guide/OrAndEvery) of potential warnings and errors.

It is always fine for a library to log at `trace` and `debug` levels, and these two should be the primary levels any library is logging at.

`trace` is the finest log level, and end-users of a library will not usually use it unless debugging very specific issues. You should consider it as a way for library developers to "log everything we could possibly need to diagnose a hard to reproduce bug."  Unrestricted logging at `trace` level may take a toll on the performance of a system, and developers can assume trace level logging will not be used in production deployments, unless enabled specifically to locate some specific issue.

This is in contrast with `debug` which some users _may_ choose to run enabled on their production systems.

> Debug level logging should be not "too" noisy. Developers should assume some production deployments may need to (or want to) run with debug level logging enabled. 
>

> > Debug level logging should not completely undermine the performance of a production system.

Author: This very much depends on a number of factors: the appender used, the volume of data, the general retention of the data and the overall propagation of the logs.

For example, a debug system logging to an in-memory ring buffer may have very low overhead even at high volume, while debug logging for all servers sent to centralized logging which is indexed and retained by ELK or Splunk may have a high cost and may overwhelm the indexing resources of the logging system.

It may be worth defining the limits of debug logging, i.e. should not saturate local CPU/IO/Network resources of the system and state that centralized logging may have additional variables to take into account.

Reviewer: Yeah that's fair but somewhat of a logging backend topic... I think it is right to say in any case "logging on debug level should not overwhelm systems" because there isn't really a good smart ( like you mention with ring buffering debug messages etc) backend around for logging in swift, and people use random backends (just println based ones...)

>  Marick deals with some of this, but there are probably dedicated Apple reporting tools for capturing and retrieving debug/trace logs when you don't have access.

Yeah that's cool, though that would be about specific appenders (backends how we call them).
The guide here only speaks in terms of the logging API -- think "slf4j-api" so it can't really assume much.

-- 

os_log is outside of the realm that this doc speaks about, I'll clarify this perhaps.

This is the "swift server guides" and as such there is no os_log because that's a darwin specific API.

> As such, `debug` logging should provide a high value understanding of what is going on in the library for end users, using domain relevant language.  Logging at `debug` level should not be overly noisy or dive deep into internals; this is what `trace` is intended for.

Author: > What good logging brings you is the executable embodiment of the knowledge about the most interesting and important events in the flow of a program, put there by the programmer writing the code. It is high-level semantic information, much easier to digest than a line by line trace or stepping of the code of the program.  https://jakob.engbloms.se/archives/1771

> Use `warning` level sparingly. Whenever possible, try to rather return or throw `Error` to end users that are descriptive enough so they can inspect, log them and figure out the issue. Potentially, they may then enable debug logging to find out more about the issue.

Author: I generally think of warnings as when you can complete an operation, and errors when you can't.  This section describe returning or throwing errors, but throwing an `Error` implies that the operation itself fails which doesn't sound like a warning.

Reviewer: It's like in Scala when you return a failed `Try` you wouldn't _also_ log that you're doing that, in order to avoid double-logging the same error. It's "throw or log" basically.

Author: I agree with "throw or log", it's attaching this advice specifically to `warning` (rather than any logging at all) that confuses it -- returning `scala.util.Failure` with a warning makes no sense, you'd log an error since the operation didn't complete.

`trace` level logging:

- Could include various additional information about a request, such as various diagnostics about created data structures, the state of caches or similar, which are created in order to serve a request.

> - Could include "begin operation" and "end operation" logging statements.

Author: May be worth describing what an "operation" is in this context -- is it a method, or a business operation / unit of work?

Author: Also, is there a way to get [dump](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swift/1539127-dump) output into logging?

Reviewer: > Also, is there a way to get dump output into logging?

not really; that's not all that much used to be honest. If anything people can use `String(reflecting:)` which is the "debug description" rather than `String(describing:)` (`"\()"`) which is the normal description of an object.

Reviewer: > May be worth describing what an "operation" is in this context -- is it a method, or a business operation / unit of work?

Ok I'll add that -- it can be any of those really; most often a function though yes

- However, please consider using [swift-distributed-tracing](https://github.com/apple/swift-distributed-tracing) to instrument "begin" and "end" events, as tracing can be more efficient than logging. Logging may need to create string representations of the durations, log levels, and other fields.

`debug` level logging:

- May include a single log statement for opening a connection, accepting a request, and so on.

> - It can include a _high level_ overview of control flow in an operation. For example: "started work, processing step X, made X decision, finished work X, result code 200".  This overview may consist of high cardinality structured data.

Author: This is a vague statement.  Opening a connection can be a single log statement, but that implies that a high level overview is multiple statements.  If it's a single "event" then the overview should not be in text format, but should be a number of key/value pairs, but that also has drawbacks in that an event has a single timestamp attached to it, whereas the overview may want distinct timestamps for "started work", "processing step" etc.

Also I'd consider decision points such as handling special cases and if/else branches to be part of this as well.

Reviewer: Those are good hints, thanks! I'll work something in

- Could include various additional information about a request, such as various diagnostics about created data structures, the state of caches or similar, which are created in order to serve a request.
- Could include "begin operation" and "end operation" logs.

> - However, please consider using [swift-distributed-tracing](https://github.com/apple/swift-distributed-tracing) to instrument "begin" and "end" events, as tracing can be more efficient than logging. Logging may need to create string representations of the durations, log levels, and other fields.

Author: > tracing can be more efficient than logging

Bit of a blanket statement there.  swift-distributed-tracing brings in things that can make stuff more complicated than logging, such as context propagation and the whole tracing model with trace/span/span events etc.

> Logging may need to create string representations of the durations, log levels, and other fields.

This doesn't mean logging is less efficient as a result.  Some binary formats are less efficient than JSON, for example.

Reviewer: Yeah I'll reword that sentence - I did want to keep some shout out to tracing here but I'll reword it a bit. Basically, "once you start debugging durations and events and stuff, tracing may be helpful to you so check it out".

 It means to explain that it automatically propagates context and we're making changes in the language and concurrency runtime to make propagation trivial, it's been long time in the making: https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0311-task-locals.md :-)

Reviewer: I made it a sidenote at the end of the section

> > You may also want to consider using [swift-distributed-tracing](https://github.com/apple/swift-distributed-tracing) to instrument "begin" and "end" events, as tracing may give you additional insights into your system behavior you would have missed with just manually analysing log statements.

#### Structured Logging (Semantic Logging)

> Libraries may want to embrace the structured logging style, which renders logs in a [semi-structured data format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semi-structured_data).

Reviewer: nice, thanks

Here are a few examples of situations when logging a message on a relatively high level might still be tolerable for a library.

> It's permissible for a library to log at `critical` level right before a _hard crash_ or assertion failure, as a last resort of informing the log collection systems or end-user about additional information detailing the reason for the crash. This should be _in addition to_ the message from a `fatalError` and can lead to an improved diagnosis/debugging experience for end users.

Author: Adding "assertion failure" here as a critical failure and system exit may happen under some circumstances where there has been a corruption of a data structure or file, and it is safer for the system to exit rather than keep running.  This isn't a "hard crash" technically, and the assertion violation itself may not be couched in terms that the user understands, so the critical error message may be a "high level overview" that explains that why the system is exiting.

Reviewer: I see your point but I think this is mixing up terminology of the two (java/scala and swift) worlds. I would not want to say assertion error because assertions are a specific thing in swift and they are not enabled in release builds. If anything this would have to be "precondition failure".

I've been pretty consistently pushing for "hard crash" meaning "process exit" in many crash handling discussions in the community as we'd like to get panics or "soft crash" (say, "crash the actor" or "thread", with a panic or similar), those would be soft crashes.

I'll keep this bit as is I think but thank you for the feedback!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's permissible for a library to log at `critical` level right before a _hard_ crash of the process, as a last resort of informing the log collection systems or end-user about additional information detailing the reason for the crash. This should be _in addition to_ the message from a `fatalError` and can lead to an improved diagnosis/debugging experience for end users.
```

Here are a few examples of situations when logging a message on a relatively high level might still be tolerable for a library.

It's permissible for a library to log at `critical` level right before a _hard crash_ or assertion failure, as a last resort of informing the log collection systems or end-user about additional information detailing the reason for the crash. This should be _in addition to_ the message from a `fatalError` and can lead to an improved diagnosis/debugging experience for end users.

> Sometimes libraries may be able to detect a harmful misconfiguration of the library. For example, selecting deprecated protocol versions. In such situations it may be useful to inform users in production by issuing a `warning`. However you should ensure that the warning is not logged repeatedly! For example, it is not acceptable for an HTTP client to log a warning on every single http request using some misconfiguration of the client. It _may_ be acceptable however for the client to log such a warning, for example, _once_ at configuration time, if the library has a good way to do this.

Author: > It is not acceptable for an HTTP client to log a warning on every single http request using some misconfiguration of the client

This is a good point about configuration.  It's surprisingly common that bugs and failures happen because of configuration, rather than code.  As such, logging errors and warnings around configuration have to be super-clear and informative.

Ideally there's multiple steps involved -- if you're lucky then there's a clean separation of stages where the YAML is parsed to AST/complex case class, and then that AST is used to apply state to an engine or factory, and you can stick errors and warnings in at each stage.

If you're unlucky, then you're calling up the config file, parsing, and applying state any time it's relevant, and various bits of the code may not even know what the original YAML source was.  So there's a lot there.
